>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, OCTOBER 10: TWIN
BOMBINGS AT A PEACE RALLY IN
TURKEY KILL DOZENS OF PEOPLE;
VIOLENCE BETWEEN PALESTINIANS
AND ISRAELIS ESCALATES; AND, IN
OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, HOW LIGHT
RAIL TRAINS CAN JUMP START
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, BUT DO
ENOUGH DRIVERS GET ON BOARD?
>> YOU HAVE TO START SOMEWHERE.
YOU HAVE TO BUILD IT.
YOU HAVE TO BASICALLY CONVINCE
PEOPLE TO PARK THEIR CARS.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS OF
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
NO ONE HAS CLAIMED
RESPONSIBILITY FOR A PAIR OF
TERRORIST BOMBINGS IN TURKEY
TODAY.
THE ATTACKS OCCURRED DURING A
PEACE MARCH IN TURKEY'S CAPITAL
CITY OF ANKARA.
MORE THAN 90 PEOPLE WERE KILLED
AND CLOSE TO 200 OTHERS WOUNDED.
I.T.N. REPORTER RAJIV POPAT HAS
MORE ON THIS STORY, WHICH
INCLUDES THE MOMENT WHEN ONE OF
THE BOMBS EXPLODED.
>> Reporter: WITNESSES
DESCRIBE SHOCKING AND CHAOTIC
SCENES.
JUST MOMENTS AFTER TWO
EXPLOSIONS IN THE CENTER OF THE
TURKISH CAPITAL ANKARA, THE
INJURED WERE TREATED ON ROADS
AND PAVEMENTS BY PASSERSBY AS
THEY WAITED FOR PARAMEDICS TO
ARRIVE.
THE BLASTS HAPPENED AHEAD OF A
PEACE MARCH, A PROTEST AGAINST
THE CONFLICT WITH KURDISH
MILITANTS IN THE SOUTHEAST OF
THE COUNTRY.
ONE OF THE BOMBS EXPLODED
OUTSIDE THE CITY'S MAIN TRAIN
STATION.
THE GOVERNMENT SAYS THIS WAS A
TERRORIST ATTACK AND THEY'RE
INVESTIGATING CLAIMS THAT A
SUICIDE BOMBER WAS RESPONSIBLE.
THE TURKISH PRIME MINISTER HAS
BEEN HOLDING EMERGENCY TALKS
WITH SENIOR OFFICIALS.
SECURITY IS NOW A TOP PRIORITY
FOR THE GOVERNMENT WITH
PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS IN THE
COUNTRY JUST THREE WEEKS AWAY.
>> Sreenivasan: A WAVE OF
STABBINGS IN JERUSALEM'S OLD
CITY AND UNREST THROUGHOUT
ISRAEL HAS PROMPTED THE ISRAELI
GOVERNMENT TO STEP UP SECURITY.
IN THE PAST WEEK AND A HALF,
STABBINGS BY PALESTINIANS HAVE
KILLED FOUR ISRAELIS AND WOUNDED
AT LEAST TEN MORE.
ISRAELI POLICE RESPONDING TO THE
ATTACKS AND TROOPS CONFRONTING
PALESTINIAN PROTESTERS HAVE
KILLED AT LEAST 20 PALESTINIANS
IN JERUSALEM AND THE PALESTINIAN
TERRITORIES OF GAZA AND THE WEST
BANK.
ISRAEL'S MILITARY SAID TODAY A
ROCKET HAD BEEN FIRED FROM GAZA
INTO SOUTHERN ISRAEL.
JOINING ME NOW VIA SKYPE FROM
JERUSALEM TO DISCUSS THE
ESCALATING UNREST IS JOSEF
FEDERMAN OF THE ASSOCIATED
PRESS.
JOSEPH, THANKS FOR JOINING YOU.
WHAT'S THE LATEST?
>> WE ARE MORE VIOLENCE TODAY.
IT APPEARS STABBINGS JERUSALEM,
AND VIOLENCE ON THE GAZA STRIP
>> Sreenivasan: ON THE ONE
HAND YOU HAVE PROTESTERS
MARCHING AND ON THE OTHER HAND
YOU SEEM TO HAVE RANDOM ATTACKS
THAT HAVE HARD TO PREDICT IN
DIFFERENT PARTS OF THE COUNTRY
NOW.
>> YEAH, IT'S SOMETHING ISRAEL
HADN'T DEALT WITH BEFORE, AT
LEAST ON THIS LEVEL.
THE ATTACKS DO NOT SEEM TO BE
ORGANIZED.
THEY DON'T SEEM TO BE COMING
FROM ABOVE.
THEY'RE SORT OF GROUND-LEVEL
VENUS.
IT'S VERY HARD TO DEFEND
YOURSELF.
WHAT YOU HAVE IS A COUNTRY THAT
IS VERY JITTERY, VERY NERVOUS,
AND EVERYBODY LOOKING OVER THEIR
SHOULDERS.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS IS
PROBABLY THE 15th TIME THAT
PEOPLE THOUGHT THIS IS THE NEXT
INTIFADA OR UPRISING.
WHAT DO PEOPLE ON THE STREET
FEEL, ON BOTH SIDE OF THIS?
>> LOOK, IT'S VERY EASY-- THE
EASY THING TO SAY IS HERE WE ARE
ENTERING A NEW INTAFADA AND
THERE ARE A LOT OF SIMILARITIES.
THE LEVEL OF CONVENIENCE, THE
FACT THIS IS DRAGGING ON, THE
FACT IT DOESN'T SEEM TO BE
STOPPING.
THERE ARE ALSO KEY DIFFERENCES.
IN THE PAST, THE INTAFADA
VIOLENCE ORGANIZED FROM THE TOP
DOWN.
A DECADE AGO, 15 YEARS AGO, WHEN
IT STARTED, YOU HAD YASSER
ARAFAT IN CHARGE OF THE
PALESTINIANS.
HE HAD ARMED FORCES WHO WERE
INVOLVED.
THIS TIME YOU HAVE MAHMOUD ABBAS
IN CHARGE OF THE PALESTINIANS.
HE IS COMMITTED TO NONVIOLENCE.
HE IS NOT CALLING THE SHOTS ON
THIS THING.
SO, AGAIN, IT'S HARD-- YOU'RE
TALKING APPLES AND OWNERS HERE,
AND IT'S VERY HARD TO SAY WHERE
THIS IS HEADING
>> Sreenivasan: AND WHAT'S THE
ISRAELI POLITICAL RESPONSE TO
THIS THEN?
>> WELL, YOU HAVE PRIME MINISTER
NETANYAHU DEALING WITH DIFFERENT
PRESSURES FROM DIFFERENT
DIRECTIONS.
HE'S A NATIONALIST.
HE HAS A HARD-LINE CABINET, SO
HE'S UNDER A LOT OF PRESSURE TO
RESPOND TOUGH AND YOU'LL SEE HIM
WHEN HE MAKES HIS PUBLIC
STATEMENTS.
HE TALKS TOUGH.
HE TALKS ABOUT THE NEED FOR THE
COUNTRY TO BAND TOGETHER, HOW TO
STOP TERRORISM.
BUT ON THE OTHER HAND, HE'S ALSO
URGING RESTRAINT, AND MOST
NOTICEABLY, A COUPLE OF DAYS
AGO, HE CALLED ON LAWMAKERS TO
STAY AWAY FROM THE TEMPLE MOUNT,
THE AREA IN JERUSALEM THAT IS AT
THE HEART OF ALL THE UNREST.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT IS THE
SITUATION FLYING SOME OF THESE
SPECIFIC AREAS?
DO YOU SEE AN INCREASED POLICE
PRESENCE?
>> YEAH, I ACTUALLY WENT FOR A
WALK THROUGH THE OLD CITY WHERE
A LOT OF THE ATTACKS HAVE BEEN
HAPPENING.
I WENT THROUGH THE OLD CITY TWO
DAYS AGO, AND IT WAS QUITE A
CHILLING EXPERIENCE.
I WALKED FROM DAMASCUS GATE,
WHICH IS IN THE HEART OF THE
PALESTINIAN SIDE OF THE OLD
CITY, OVER TO THE WESTERN WALL,
WHICH IS THE JEWISH SIDE, AND
REALLY EVERY 50 YARDS, EVERY 100
YARDS, THERE WERE GROUPS OF
POLICEMEN, SORT OF MINIATURE
CHECKPOINTS AS YOU WALKED
THROUGH THE ALLEYWAYS, PATROLS
EVERYWHERE.
I'VE BEEN HERE OVER A DECADE.
I'VE NEVER SEEN ANYTHING LIKE
THAT BEFORE.
>> Sreenivasan: JOSEPH
FEDERMAN OF THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
JOINING US HAVE A SKYPE FROM
JERUSALEM, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: IN NEIGHBORING
SYRIA, RUSSIAN FORCES HAVE
STEPPED UP THEIR ATTACKS ON
OPPONENTS OF SYRIAN PRESIDENT
BASHAR AL-ASSAD.
RUSSIA'S MILITARY SAYS IT BOMBED
MORE THAN 50 TARGETS IN THE PAST
24 HOURS, SUPPORTING
PRO-GOVERNMENT GROUND TROOPS
FIGHTING REBEL GROUPS.
JOINING ME NOW VIA SKYPE FROM
BEIRUT TO DISCUSS THE SITUATION
IN SYRIA IS "WALL STREET
JOURNAL" REPORTER SAM DAGHER.
SAM, WE HAVE HEARD IN THE PAST
FEW DAYS OF THE RUSSIANS
ATTACKING DIFFERENT POSITIONS IN
SYRIA BY LAND, AIR, AND SEA.
>> THAT IS CORRECT, HARRY.
BUT THEY'VE BEEN PRIMARILY
TARGETING THE NON-ISIS FIGHTERS.
THESE ARE REBELS IN THE WESTERN
HALF OF THE COUNTRY.
THESE ARE ISLAMIST REBELS AS
WELL AS RELATIVELY MODERATE
REBELS LINKED TO THE SO-CALLED
FREE SYRIAN ARMY WHICH HAS
RECEIVED ASSISTANCE IN THE PAST
FROM THE UNITED STATES,
INCLUDING ANTITANK MISSILES
>> Sreenivasan: SO THIS PUTS
THE U.S. IN A POSITION WHERE
PEOPLE THAT THEY HAVE SUPPORTED
ON THE GROUND AGAINST PRESIDENT
BASHAR AL-ASSAD ARE NOW BEING
ATTACKED BY THE RUSSIANS.
>> YOU HAVE TO ALSO LOOK AT THE
REPERCUSSIONS OF WHAT THE
RUSSIANS ARE DOING.
FIRST OF ALL, BY FOCUSING ON
THESE GROUPS, THEY'RE ALLOWING
ISIS TO EXPLOIT THE SITUATION,
AND WE'VE SEEN THAT ALREADY
HAPPEN IN ALEPPO.
ISIS TOOK ADVANTAGE OF THE FACT
THAT, YOU KNOW, ITS RIVAL, THESE
OTHER REBEL GROUPS, ARE
PREOCCUPIED, FENDING OFF REGIME
FORCES WHO ARE TRYING TO FIGHT
THEM WITH RUSSIAN SUPPORT.
SO WHAT ISIS DID IN NORTHEAST
ALEPPO IS CAPTURE LEAST 10
VILLAGES YESTERDAY FROM THE
REBELS, AS WELL AS A VERY
IMPORTANT BASE.
IT'S CALLED THE INFANTRY
ACADEMY, NORTHEAST OF THE CITY
OF ALEPPO, AND THIS IS SOMETHING
THE REBELS CAPTURED FROM THE
REGIME IN 2012.
SECOND OF ALL, YOU ALSO HAVE TO
LOOK AT WHAT'S HAPPENING ON THE
GROUND, WHICH COULD BE
EXACERBATING THE REFUGEE CRISIS.
THERE ARE A A LOT OF PEOPLE
FLEEING THE VILLAGES BEING HIT
BY THE RUSSIANS.
THESE ARE PEOPLE PRIMARILY--
WE'RE SEEING REPORTS OF
THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE LEAVING
VILLAGES IN THE COUNTRYSIDE
WHERE AN OFFENSIVE IS UNDER WAY
BY THE ROW SCREAM AND ITS
ALLIES, THE IRANIANS AND THE
SHIITE FIGHTERS FROM LEBANON AND
ELSEWHERE, WHO ARE BEING BACKED
BY THE RUSSIANS FROM THE AIR.
SO PEOPLE ARE FLEEING THESE
VILLAGES.
SO THAT POTENTIALLY COULD BE
MAKING THE REFUGEE SITUATION
MUCH WORSE, AND THESE ARE PEOPLE
WHO HAVE ALREADY BEEN DISPLACED
FROM OTHER PARTS OF THE COUNTRY.
A THIRD CONSIDERATION AS WELL IS
THE SECTARIAN OVERTONES OF
WHAT'S GOING ON.
THE RUSSIANS AND THEIR ALLIES
ARE TARGETING PREDOMINANTLY
SUNNI VILLAGES, AND THE AREA OF
THE OPERATION RIGHT NOW IS THE--
IS BASICALLY THE PRINCIPAL
SECTARIAN FAULT LINE IN SYRIA
SEPARATING SUNNIS FROM THE
SHIITE-LINKED ALAWITES, TO WHICH
BASHAR AL-ASSAD BELONGS.
PEOPLE FROM A CERTAIN SECT,
SUNNIS, LEAVING THEIR VILLAGES
BECAUSE OF THE MILITARY
CAMPAIGNS BEING BACKED BY THE
RUSSIANS.
>> Sreenivasan: SAM DAGHER OF
THE "WALL STREET JOURNAL"
JOINING US VIA SKYPE FROM
BEIRUT, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> MY PLEASURE, HARI.
>> Sreenivasan: NORTH KOREA SAYS
IT IS PREPARED TO FEND OFF ANY
ATTACK BY THE UNITED STATES.
IN THE CAPITAL CITY OF PYONGYANG
TODAY, A MILITARY PARADE WITH
THOUSANDS OF TROOPS MARKED THE
70th ANNIVERSARY OF THE
COUNTRY'S RULING WORKERS PARTY.
IN A RARE PUBLIC SPEECH, NORTH
KOREAN LEADER KIM JONG-UN SAID,
"OUR REVOLUTIONARY FORCE IS
READY TO RESPOND TO ANY KIND OF
WAR THE AMERICAN IMPERIALISTS
WANT."
BUT HE MADE NO COMMENT ABOUT
NORTH KOREA'S NUCLEAR WEAPON OR
LONG-RANGE MISSILE PROGRAMS.
CHINA, CUBA AND VIETNAM SENT
DELEGATIONS TO THE EVENT.
KIM, WHO IS IN HIS 30s, ASSUMED
POWER AFTER HIS FATHER'S DEATH
FOUR YEARS AGO.
FORMER PRISONER OF WAR BOWE
BERGDAHL IS EXPECTED TO BE
SPARED JAIL TIME IN THE U.S.
BERGDAHL HAS BEEN UNDERGOING A
MILITARY HEARING IN TEXAS FOR
LEAVING HIS BASE PRIOR TO BEING
KIDNAPPED BY THE TALIBAN INSIDE
AFGHANISTAN IN 2009.
BERGDAHL'S ATTORNEY SAYS TODAY
THE ARMY INFORMED HIM IT WILL
RECOMMEND LESS THAN A FULL COURT
MARTIAL FOR THE CHARGES OF
DESERTION AND MISBEHAVIOR BEFORE
THE ENEMY.
BECAUSE SOLDIERS SEARCHED FOR
BERGDAHL FOR 45 DAYS, ARMY
COMMANDERS ALLEGED BERGDAHL HAD
ENDANGERED THEIR LIVES.
HE SPENT FIVE YEARS IN TALIBAN
CAPTIVITY.
LAST YEAR, THE TALIBAN FREED
BERGDAHL IN EXCHANGE FOR FIVE
TALIBAN PRISONERS HELD AT THE
U.S. MILITARY PRISON IN
GUANTANAMO BAY, CUBA.
AFTER FOUR DRY DAYS, RAIN HAS
RETURNED TO SOUTH CAROLINA.
THUNDERSTORMS DROPPED ANOTHER
INCH OR TWO OF RAIN TODAY IN AND
AROUND COLUMBIA, SOUTH CAROLINA,
SLOWING RECOVERY EFFORTS FROM
THE RECORD TWO FEET OF RAINFALL
LAST WEEK.
HUNDREDS OF RESIDENTS HAVE NOT
BEEN ABLE TO RETURN TO THEIR
HOMES AS SOME FLOODED ROADS AND
RIVERS HAVE BEEN SLOW TO RECEDE.
MORE THAN 300 ROADS AND BRIDGES
REMAIN CLOSED STATEWIDE,
INCLUDING STRETCHES OF I-95 AND
OTHER INTERSTATE HIGHWAYS.
CALIFORNIA IS COOLING OFF.
A HEAT WAVE IN SOUTHERN
CALIFORNIA HAS PEAKED WITH
THREE-DIGIT TEMPERATURES IN MANY
AREAS.
YESTERDAY, IT WAS 104 DEGREES IN
BURBANK, 105 IN LONG BEACH AND
108 IN THE CITY OF CAMARILLO, A
RECORD HIGH.
TODAY, THOSE CITIES WERE DOWN TO
THE MID-90s.
THE HIGH DEMAND FOR POWER LEFT
4,000 RESIDENTS OF WEST LOS
ANGELES WITHOUT ELECTRICITY LAST
NIGHT AFTER A BLACKOUT.
>> Sreenivasan: LIGHT RAIL--
TRAIN SYSTEMS AT STREET LEVEL--
ARE GROWING IN MANY AMERICAN
CITIES WHERE THE CAR IS STILL
KING.
ONE OF THEM IS DALLAS, WHICH HAS
EXPANDED LIGHT RAIL BY LURING
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AROUND NEW
TRACKS AND STATIONS.
BUT RIDERSHIP IS LOW, WITH LESS
THAN 2% OF DALLAS RESIDENTS
REGULARLY USING THE SYSTEM.
OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT TONIGHT
LOOKS AT TRANSIT-ORIENTED
DEVELOPMENT IN TEXAS AS PART OF
OUR ONGOING SERIES ON HOW CITIES
ARE TAKING INNOVATIVE STEPS TO
SOLVE PROBLEMS, MAKE LIFE BETTER
FOR RESIDENTS AND SERVE AS A
MODEL FOR OTHER CITIES.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT KARLA
MURTHY REPORTS FROM DALLAS AND
HOUSTON IN THIS INSTALLMENT OF
"URBAN IDEAS."
>> Reporter: WELL BEFORE DAWN,
ADRIUANNA HUGHES IS STARTING HER
COMMUTE TO WORK FROM A SUBURB
SOUTH OF DALLAS, TEXAS.
>> THERE'S ALWAYS A BIT OF
CONGESTION HERE.
>> Reporter: HUGHES LOVES HER
CAR, BUT THE RUSH HOUR COMMUTE
IN DALLAS, EVEN THIS EARLY, CAN
BE PAINFUL.
ON A BAD DAY, IT CAN TAKE HER
TWO HOURS EACH WAY, SO SHE'S
CHANGED HOW SHE GETS TO WORK.
SHE PARKS HERE ON THE OUTSKIRTS
OF DOWNTOWN DALLAS AND BOARDS A
TRAIN.
>> WHEN I DID DRIVE, I WAS A
NERVOUS WRECK BECAUSE OF
TRAFFIC.
MY COMMUTE VARIED TOO MUCH.
JUST SOME DAYS IT'D BE REALLY
EASY AND REALLY SHORT, SOME DAYS
IT'D BE REALLY LONG AND I'D BE
LATE.
>> Reporter: NOW SHE CURLS UP
WITH HER TRAIN BLANKET, LISTENS
TO MUSIC AND TEXTS AS SHE MAKES
THE JOURNEY TO RICHARDSON,
TEXAS, 18 MILES NORTH OF
DOWNTOWN DALLAS.
THAT'S WHERE HER JOB AT
INSURANCE GIANT STATE FARM IS
BASED.
FROM HER DOOR TO HER DESK TAKES
JUST OVER AN HOUR.
DID YOU EVER THINK YOU WOULD BE
TAKING A TRAIN IN TEXAS?
>> I DIDN'T.
I REALLY DIDN'T.
I WAS CERTAINLY ONE OF THOSE
PEOPLE, "NO, I JUST NEED MY
CAR."
I'VE CERTAINLY CHANGED THAT
BECAUSE I'VE BEEN ABLE TO DO
EVERYTHING THAT I'VE DONE
BEFORE.
>> YOU DON'T HAVE TO FIGURE OUT
HOW TO USE THE MACHINE.
>> Reporter: GETTING CAR LOVERS
LIKE HUGHES TO GIVE LIGHT RAIL A
TRY IS ONE OF THE MAIN
CHALLENGES FOR GARY THOMAS, WHO
RUNS DALLAS AREA RAPID TRANSIT,
KNOWN AS DART.
HE TOOK ME ON A RIDE ON DALLAS'
RED LINE, WHICH STRETCHES FROM
THE NORTHERN SUBURB OF PLANO TO
SOUTH OF DALLAS.
WHAT IS THE GREATEST BARRIER
THAT YOU'RE SEEING TO GETTING
MORE PEOPLE ON TO THE TRAIN?
>> IT'S REALLY GETTING PEOPLE
COMFORTABLE WITH IT.
>> Reporter: FOR DECADES,
SUNBELT AND WESTERN CITIES
INCLUDING DALLAS, PHOENIX, SALT
LAKE CITY AND DENVER HAVE GROWN
ALONG WITH THEIR HIGHWAYS INTO
SPRAWLING METROPOLITAN AREAS.
TODAY, MANY CITIES ARE BUILDING
OUT THEIR OWN LIGHT RAIL
SYSTEMS, AND THEY'RE HOPING TO
CREATE MAGNETS FOR ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT.
AND DALLAS HAS BECOME AN
UNLIKELY LEADER.
SINCE LAUNCHING IN 1996, DART
HAS BECOME THE LONGEST LIGHT
RAIL SYSTEM IN THE COUNTRY WITH
62 STATIONS AND 90 MILES OF
TRACK STRETCHING ALL THE WAY TO
D.F.W. AIRPORT.
ADJUSTING FOR INFLATION, IT COST
MORE THAN $8 BILLION TO BUILD.
HERE IN DOWNTOWN DALLAS, DART'S
FOUR LIGHT RAIL LINES CONVERGE,
AND THIS IS ONE OF THEIR BUSIEST
STATIONS.
ABOUT 100,000 RIDERS USE THE
LIGHT RAIL EACH WEEKDAY, BUT
THAT'S IN A REGION OF MORE THAN
SIX MILLION PEOPLE.
THE SYSTEM, DESIGNED AS A
TRADITIONAL HUB AND SPOKES,
STRETCHES FAR OUT INTO THE
SURROUNDING SUBURBS.
RESIDENTS OF 13 MUNICIPALITIES
VOTED TO IMPOSE A ONE-CENT SALES
TAX ON THEMSELVES TO HELP PAY
FOR THE SYSTEM.
THE TAX BEGAN IN 1984 AND
CONTINUES TODAY, CONTRIBUTING
$486 MILLION IN 2014.
THAT COVERS THE ENTIRE OPERATING
BUDGET OF DART, WHICH ALSO
INCLUDES BUSES.
GETTING TEXANS TO TAX THEMSELVES
FOR PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION, THAT
DOESN'T SEEM LIKE SOMETHING THAT
WOULD GO OVER EASILY AROUND
HERE.
>> WELL, CERTAINLY, WHEN YOU SAY
IT OUT LOUD IN TODAY'S TIMES,
YOU THINK, "GOSH, HOW DID THAT
EVER HAPPEN," RIGHT?
FOLKS REALIZED THEN THAT OUR
REGION WAS GROWING SO QUICKLY
THAT THEY HAD TO DO SOMETHING
DIFFERENT.
AND IT'S NOT LIKE TRANSIT IS
BRAND NEW TO NORTH TEXAS;
TRANSIT WAS HERE IN THE LATE
1800s AND ALL THE WAY THROUGH
THE FIRST HALF OF THE 20th
CENTURY.
AND NOW YOU'RE SEEING HISTORY
KIND OF COME BACK AROUND.
>> Reporter: OPEN LAND AROUND
THESE NEW TRAIN STATIONS
PRESENTED NEW OPPORTUNITIES FOR
DEVELOPMENT, ANOTHER SELLING
POINT.
ONE OF THE FIRST DEVELOPMENTS TO
TAKE SHAPE IN THE 1990s WAS
MOCKINGBIRD STATION, JUST NORTH
OF DOWNTOWN.
JUST STEPS AWAY FROM MOCKINGBIRD
STATION BEHIND ME, YOU CAN FIND
A MOVIE THEATER, SHOPS,
RESTAURANTS, APARTMENTS AND
OFFICE SPACE.
THIS IS WHAT DART POINTS TO AS A
MODEL FOR THE KIND OF
DEVELOPMENT THAT CAN BE BUILT
AROUND TRAIN STATIONS.
>> AS THESE DEVELOPMENTS STARTED
TO TAKE OFF, WE THOUGHT, "OH,
OKAY, NOW WE'RE STARTING TO GET
THIS.
THIS IS MORE THAN JUST
TRANSPORTATION."
>> Reporter: BUT MOCKINGBIRD
STATION IS LOCATED NEXT TO A
MAJOR HIGHWAY AND HAS AMPLE
PARKING FOR PEOPLE NOT TAKING
DART.
HOW CAN YOU BE SURE THAT THESE
DEVELOPMENTS WOULDN'T HAVE
HAPPENED ANYWAY, EVEN WITHOUT
THE LIGHT RAIL SYSTEM PUT IN
PLACE?
>> SOME OF THE DEVELOPMENTS
PROBABLY WOULD HAVE HAPPENED
EVEN WITHOUT THE LIGHT RAIL, BUT
THEY PROBABLY WOULD HAVE LOOKED
DIFFERENT AS WELL.
>> Reporter: A STUDY
COMMISSIONED BY DART FOUND
DEVELOPMENTS BUILT BETWEEN 1993
AND 2013 NEAR LIGHT RAIL
STATIONS LIKE MOCKINGBIRD ARE
WORTH MORE THAN TWICE AS MUCH AS
DEVELOPMENTS BUILT IN COMPARABLE
PLACES WITHOUT RAIL.
>> WE'RE PROBABLY ABOUT FOUR
YEARS FROM COMPLETION.
>> Reporter: WALT MOUNTFORD IS
DEVELOPING A GIANT MIXED-USE
PROJECT CALLED "CITY LINE."
IT'S LOCATED ADJACENT TO A DART
RAIL STATION AND TWO MAJOR
HIGHWAYS IN THE SUBURB OF
RICHARDSON.
>> WE HAD A COMPLETELY BLANK
SLATE-- 186 ACRES OF PREVIOUSLY
UNDEVELOPED LAND RIGHT AT THE
HEART OF A VERY PEDESTRIAN-
FRIENDLY LIGHT RAIL STOP.
AND SO, IT ALLOWED US TO CREATE
AN URBAN ENVIRONMENT IN THE
SUBURBS.
EVERYTHING IS VERY WALKABLE
HERE.
>> Reporter: IT'S A $1.5 BILLION
DEVELOPMENT WHICH IS STILL UNDER
CONSTRUCTION.
IT WILL HAVE NEARLY 4,000 RENTAL
UNITS, A HOTEL, 28 RESTAURANTS,
A WHOLE FOODS SUPERMARKET AND
4.5 MILLION SQUARE FEET OF
OFFICE SPACE, INCLUDING FOUR
BUILDINGS FOR ABOUT 8,000 STATE
FARM EMPLOYEES LIKE ADRIUANNA
HUGHES, WHO NO LONGER HAS TO
DRIVE MORE THAN 60 MILES A DAY.
>> I WAS FILLING UP TWO TIMES A
WEEK AND HAVING TO GET A LITTLE
MORE GAS TO CARRY ME THROUGH THE
WEEKEND TO GO TO THE MALL AND
RUN ERRANDS.
I DON'T HAVE TO DO THAT.
I HAVE ONE TANK OF GAS, AND IT
LASTS ME THROUGHOUT THE WEEK.
>> Reporter: MOUNTFORD SAYS THE
PROXIMITY TO LIGHT RAIL MAKES
EMPLOYERS MORE ATTRACTIVE TO
YOUNGER WORKERS.
>> THIS IS A NEW TREND THAT'LL
ULTIMATELY LEAD TO A CRITICAL
MASS OF BEING ABLE TO ATTRACT
COMPANIES AND RESIDENTS AND
SUPPORTING ALL THE RESTAURANTS,
HOTELS, THEATERS AND REALLY
BRING EVERYONE TOGETHER AT ONE
LOCATION.
>> THE BUILDING IS GOING UP
AGAINST THAT BUILDING OVER
THERE.
>> Reporter: WHILE DEVELOPMENT
AROUND DART IN THE SUBURBS MAY
HAVE THRIVED, DALLAS DEVELOPER
JOHN TATUM SAYS IT HASN'T
DOWNTOWN.
>> THE HOPE IS TO REALIZE THE
EFFICIENCIES OF USING TRANSIT
FOR A DEVELOPER TO AVOID PARKING
GARAGES.
THE TAX BASE IN DOWNTOWN COULD
GROW A MULTIPLE OR TWO, AND
THAT'S LOTS OF BILLIONS OF
DOLLARS.
NOW, THESE BUILDINGS ARE BEING
REPOPULATED, AND THEY NEED
DOUBLE THE PARKING THEY WERE
BUILT WITH IN THE 1980s.
>> Reporter: TATUM SAYS TOO FEW
PEOPLE TAKE TRANSIT.
>> WHAT IS HARDER TO SEE IS
NOT THE MILES AND HOW BIG THAT
IS AND WHAT AN ACHIEVEMENT
THAT IS THAT IT GOES THROUGH ALL
THESE SUBURBS.
WHAT'S HARDER TO SEE IS THAT THE
RIDERSHIP IS LACKLUSTER.
COST PER SEAT MILE IS WAY HIGH;
THAT THERE'S PARKING LOTS NEAR
TRANSIT STATIONS THAT AREN'T
BEING BUILT ON AND PEOPLE AREN'T
TALKING ABOUT BUILDING ON THEM.
>> Reporter: 240 MILES TO THE
SOUTH, DALLAS' TRADITIONAL TEXAS
RIVAL, HOUSTON, HAS TAKEN A VERY
DIFFERENT APPROACH TO LIGHT
RAIL.
>> ALTHOUGH WE LOVE DALLAS, WE
THINK HOUSTON IS MUCH BETTER.
I'M GOING TO SAY THAT.
>> Reporter: TOM LAMBERT RUNS
HOUSTON'S TRANSIT SYSTEM, KNOWN
AS METRO, WHICH OPENED ITS FIRST
LIGHT RAIL LINE IN 2004.
>> UP UNTIL THAT TIME, WE DID
NOT HAVE RAIL OPERATING.
WE WERE REALLY A TRULY ALL-BUS-
BASED SYSTEM.
BUT THEN WE BEGAN TO SEE THAT IF
YOU REALLY WANT TO MOVE PEOPLE
IN DIFFERENT MODES, RAIL REALLY
BECOMES A HIGH-CAPACITY MOVEMENT
OF PEOPLE.
BUT IT'S REALLY GOT TO BE IN
THOSE CORRIDORS THAT HAVE THE
DENSITY TO SUPPORT THAT.
>> Reporter: AND THAT'S A BIG
DIFFERENCE WITH DALLAS.
HOUSTON'S MAIN LINE IS ONLY
ABOUT 13 MILES LONG, BUT BECAUSE
IT RUNS THROUGH ONE OF THE
DENSEST PARTS OF THE CITY, IT'S
RIDERSHIP PER MILE FAR EXCEEDS
DALLAS.
IN FACT, IT'S ONE OF THE HIGHEST
IN THE COUNTRY.
INSTEAD OF STRETCHING FAR INTO
THE SUBURBS, LIKE DALLAS,
HOUSTON'S SYSTEM IS COMPACT,
CONNECTING A FEW MAJOR HUBS,
INCLUDING NRG STADIUM AND THE
TEXAS MEDICAL CENTER WITH
DOWNTOWN.
URBAN PLANNER AND METRO BOARD
MEMBER CHRISTOF SPIELER IS AN
AVID TRANSIT USER.
>> IF YOU BUILD LINES IN DENSE,
WALKABLE CITIES, YOU GET... IN
DENSE, WALKABLE NEIGHBORHOODS,
YOU GET HIGHER RIDERSHIP.
>> Reporter: HE BELIEVES LIGHT
RAIL HAS BEEN A CATALYST TO
DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT, WITH
$8 BILLION OF PROJECTS ALONG A
7.5-MILE STRETCH OF TRACK.
FOR EXAMPLE, LOOK AT THE
NEIGHBORHOOD OF MIDTOWN IN THE
HEART OF HOUSTON.
ACROSS FROM THE LIGHT RAIL
STATION, THERE'S A MIXED-USE
DEVELOPMENT UNDER CONSTRUCTION
WITH 363 APARTMENTS AND 30,000
SQUARE FEET OF RETAIL SPACE.
>> THIS ISN'T SOME EMPTY FIELD
ON THE OUTSKIRTS OF TOWN THAT
GETS A NEW DEVELOPMENT; IT'S A
NEIGHBORHOOD LIKE THIS.
WE'RE SEEING A REAL SHIFT IN THE
KIND OF PLACES PEOPLE WANT TO
LIVE IN.
NEIGHBORHOODS THAT HAVE NOT JUST
HOMES BUT PLACES TO EAT AND
PLACES TO SHOP ARE FUN TO LIVE
IN.
I MEAN, THERE'S A REAL CHANGE IN
THE ATTITUDE TOWARD CITIES.
>> Reporter: DALLAS IS NOW
TRYING TO BUILD A NEW LINE
THROUGH DOWNTOWN AND ASKING FOR
FEDERAL FUNDS TO HELP PAY FOR
IT.
DART CHIEF GARY THOMAS SAYS
TURNING CAR-CENTRIC DALLAS INTO
A MASS TRANSIT MECCA IS STILL A
WORK IN PROGRESS.
IS LIGHT RAIL BEING UTILIZED THE
WAY IT SHOULD BE?
>> YOU HAVE TO START SOMEWHERE.
YOU HAVE TO BUILD IT.
YOU HAVE TO BASICALLY CONVINCE
PEOPLE TO PARK THEIR CARS.
AND AGAIN, IF THAT CHOICE
DOESN'T EXIST, WE KNOW WHAT
THEY'RE GOING TO DO, RIGHT?
>> Sreenivasan: TO UNDERSCORE
THAT CHALLENGE OF GETTING PEOPLE
TO DRIVE LESS-- AS LIGHT RAIL
TRACK MILEAGE IN DALLAS DOUBLED
SINCE 2009, RIDERSHIP WENT UP
ONLY 50% AND REMAINS FAR BELOW
EXPECTATIONS.
DART PROJECTED IT WOULD BE
CARRYING 45 MILLION PASSENGER
TRIPS A YEAR BY NOW, BUT THE
SYSTEM HAS REACHED ONLY TWO-
THIRDS OF THAT GOAL, 30 MILLION
TRIPS A YEAR.
DART NOW PROJECTS LESS THAN 1%
RIDERSHIP GROWTH OVER THE NEXT
FOUR YEARS.
WHAT'S PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
LIKE WHERE YOU LIVE?
LET US KNOW AT
www.facebook.com/newshour.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: AS THE NEWEST
NOBEL PRIZE WINNERS WERE
ANNOUNCED THIS WEEK, THE CAREER
OF A PAST NOBEL PRIZE WINNER WAS
WINDING DOWN, SOMEONE WHO HAS
BEEN PIVOTAL IN THE FIGHT
AGAINST AIDS.
NEWSHOUR'S MEGAN THOMPSON
REPORTS.
>> Reporter: IN THE EARLY 1980s,
FRENCH SCIENTIST FRANCOISE
BARRÉ-SINOUSSI-- ONE OF ONLY A
FEW WOMEN AT THE PRESTIGIOUS
PASTEUR INSTITUTE IN PARIS--
BEGAN SEEING PATIENTS INFECTED
WITH A MYSTERIOUS VIRUS.
>> IT WAS A LOT OF PRESSURE, YOU
KNOW, BECAUSE OF COURSE WE HAD
ALREADY SOME EVIDENCE THAT THIS
VIRUS WAS TRANSMITTED BY BLOOD,
BY SEXUAL ROOTS AND FROM MOTHER
TO CHILD.
>> Reporter: IN 1983, BARRÉ-
SINOUSSI AND HER MENTOR
DISCOVERED H.I.V., THE HUMAN
IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS WHICH
CAUSES AIDS.
SHE SHARED THE NOBEL PRIZE FOR
MEDICINE IN 2008 AND DEDICATED
HER CAREER TO RESEARCH AND
ACTIVISM, TRAVELING THE WORLD TO
FIGHT THE SPREAD OF THE DISEASE.
TODAY, FOR THOSE WHO HAVE ACCESS
TO NEW TREATMENTS AND DRUGS,
H.I.V. IS NO LONGER AN
AUTOMATIC DEATH SENTENCE FOR THE
ESTIMATED 37 MILLION PEOPLE
AROUND THE WORLD LIVING WITH THE
VIRUS.
BARRÉ-SINOUSSI SAYS EVEN THOUGH
A CURE MAY NEVER BE FOUND, SHE'S
CONFIDENT THAT AT SOME POINT,
PATIENTS MAY NO LONGER NEED
INDEFINITE TREATMENT.
>> I AM PERSONALLY CONVINCED
THAT REMISSION IS FEASIBLE, IS
ACHIEVABLE.
WHEN?
I DON'T KNOW.
>> Reporter: BARRÉ-SINOUSSI HAS
CLOSED HER LAB, BUT SHE PLANS TO
CONTINUE HER ADVOCACY WORK AS
LONG AS SHE CAN.
SHE SAYS HER ONLY REGRET IS NOT
FINDING AN H.I.V. VACCINE.
>> I ENCOURAGE A NEW GENERATION
OF SCIENTISTS TODAY TO CONTINUE.
>> Sreenivasan: ON PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND SUNDAY, WILL UPCOMING
NATIONAL ELECTIONS MOVE MYANMAR
TOWARD GREATER DEMOCRACY?
>> WE WILL TRY TO BUILD A
GOVERNMENT THAT REFLECTS THE
WILL OF THE PEOPLE AND RESPECTS
THE PEOPLE.
>> Sreenivasan: ON THE NEXT
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
AND FINALLY, THE SECRET SERVICE
AGENT WHO NANCY REAGAN CREDITED
WITH SAVING HER HUSBAND'S LIFE
HAS DIED.
JERRY PARR WAS THE LEAD AGENT ON
DUTY DURING THE MARCH 1981
ASSASSINATION ATTEMPT ON
PRESIDENT RONALD REAGAN.
AFTER WOULD-BE ASSASSIN JOHN
HINCKLEY FIRED TOWARD REAGAN
OUTSIDE A WASHINGTON HOTEL,
AGENT PARR SHOVED THE PRESIDENT
INTO A LIMOUSINE.
WHEN PARR REALIZED REAGAN HAD
BEEN SHOT IN THE CHEST, HE
ORDERED THE LIMO TO DRIVE TO
GEORGE WASHINGTON HOSPITAL.
PARR HAD ALSO SERVED ON
PRESIDENT CARTER'S SECURITY
DETAIL AND LATER BECAME A
MINISTER.
HE WAS 85 YEARS OLD.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.